Docs/enable flex layout (#1090)
mckinsey/vizro: vizro-core/docs/pages/user-guides/layouts.md

# How to change the layout of your page

> The [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] model accepts a `layout` argument that enables custom arrangement of charts and components on the screen. This guide shows how to customize the layout using either the default [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] model or the optional [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex] model inside the `layout` argument of the [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] or the [`Container`][vizro.models.Container].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] model accepts a `layout` argument that enables custom arrangement of charts and components on the screen. This guide shows how to customize the layout using either the default [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] model or the optional [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex] model inside the `layout` argument of the [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] or the [`Container`][vizro.models.Container].
```

Reviewer: Since the second sentence, that starts "This guide..." is quite long, and there's an either/or statement, I think it would make sense to make them two bullets:

```suggestion
This guide shows how to customize the layout with the `layout` argument of the [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] or the [`Container`][vizro.models.Container] for:

* either the default [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] model 
* or the optional [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex] model  
```

Or similar!

Reviewer: You could even put anchor links to the parts of the page that cover each so the reader can jump straight to them.

## Layout options: Grid and Flex

> The `layout` argument allows you to choose between two layout models: [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] (default) and [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex]. Both models provide different ways to organize components on the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `layout` argument enables you to choose between two layout models: [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] (default) and [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex]. Both models provide different ways to organize components on the page.
```

- **Grid layout**: The [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] layout arranges components in a structured grid where rows and columns are explicitly defined. This layout is ideal for precise control over the placement of components.
- **Flex layout**: The [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex] layout arranges components using a flexible box model, where items can grow, shrink, and wrap dynamically based on available space. This layout is ideal for responsive designs where components need to adapt to different screen sizes.

> The `layout` argument of the [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] model is optional. If no layout is specified, it will default to a grid layout - all charts/components are then automatically [**stacked vertically**](layouts.md#vertical-and-horizontal-stacking) on the page in one column.

Reviewer: Maybe make this a note admonition?

```
The `layout` argument of the [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] model is optional. If no layout is specified, it will default to a grid layout - all charts/components are then automatically [**stacked vertically**](layouts.md#vertical-and-horizontal-stacking) on the page in one column.
```

# How to change the layout of your page

The [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] and the [`Container`][vizro.models.Container] model accept a `layout` argument that enables custom arrangement of charts and components on the screen. This guide shows how to customize the `layout` with:

- \[either the default [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] model\](#grid-layout)

> - \[or the optional [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex] model\](#flex-layout)

Author: Ah, but it dit work on first render 😆  Good to know!

## Layout options: Grid and Flex

The `layout` argument enables you to choose between two layout models: [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] (default) and [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex]. Both models provide different ways to organize components on the page.

- **Grid layout**: The [`Grid`][vizro.models.Layout] layout arranges components in a structured grid where rows and columns are explicitly defined. This layout is ideal for precise control over the placement of components.
- **Flex layout**: The [`Flex`][vizro.models.Flex] layout arranges components using a flexible box model, where items can grow, shrink, and wrap dynamically based on available space. This layout is ideal for responsive designs where components need to adapt to different screen sizes.

> 

Author: Hmm, I don't think that's entirely accurate 🤔 Even with only two large components side-by-side, I might prefer `Flex` e.g. if I want to enforce a minimum width (very common with pictures) and allow them to wrap when space is tight. `Grid` always keeps the fixed row/column structure, so they wouldn’t stack. For me, the dynamic positioning is the key difference.

!!! note "The default layout"

>     The `layout` argument of the [`Page`][vizro.models.Page] model is optional. If no layout is specified, it will default to a grid layout - all charts/components are then automatically [**stacked vertically**](layouts.md#vertical-and-horizontal-stacking) on the page in one column.

Reviewer 2: Would it not be better to make the default a flex layout then? If they are vertically stacked anyway?

Author: I thought about that too, but ultimately decided it wouldn't be a good idea because the visual outcome would differ. With a flex layout as the default, the number and size of items could cause immediate scrolling. On the other hand, using a grid would force everything to fit on one page.

Reviewer 3: Agreed 👍 It's a close call but I think our current default is probably best still.

    === "Result"
        [![GridScroll]][gridscroll]

### Further customization

For further customization, such as changing the gap between row and column, refer to the documentation of the [`Layout`][vizro.models.Layout] model.

## Flex Layout

> The [Flex][vizro.models.Flex] layout offers a dynamic and flexible way to organize components within a page. Built on the CSS Flexbox model, it is specifically designed to create responsive layouts that seamlessly adjust to varying screen sizes and available space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Flex][vizro.models.Flex] layout offers a dynamic and flexible way to organize components within a page. Built on the CSS Flexbox model, it is specifically designed to create responsive layouts that adjust to varying screen sizes and available space.
```

> Unlike the [Grid][vizro.models.Layout] layout, which uses a predefined row-and-column structure, the `Flex` layout provides greater flexibility by allowing components to resize, align, and position themselves dynamically based on the layout configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the [Grid][vizro.models.Layout] layout, which uses a predefined row-and-column structure, the `Flex` layout provides greater flexibility by enabling components to resize, align, and position themselves dynamically based on the layout configuration.
```

> If you're new to Flexbox, we strongly recommend exploring [An Interactive Guide to Flexbox](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/css/interactive-guide-to-flexbox/). This tutorial provides a visual introduction to the core concepts of Flexbox, making it easier to understand how to leverage the `Flex` layout effectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're new to Flexbox, we strongly recommend exploring [An Interactive Guide to Flexbox](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/css/interactive-guide-to-flexbox/). 
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this sentence "This tutorial provides a visual introduction to the core concepts of Flexbox, making it easier to understand how to leverage the `Flex` layout effectively." as it seems a bit corporate. Are you talking about the article/section of these docs. Maybe you could say

```suggestion
In the rest of this section, we'll introduce the core concepts of Flexbox.
```

Author: Let me just remove that then, but overall we still need the link, because we don't explain the core concepts of Flexbox after. It's explained in the external tutorial only :)

        )

        dashboard = vm.Dashboard(pages=[page])
        Vizro().build(dashboard).run()
        ```

    === "app.yaml"
        ```yaml
        # Still requires a .py to add data to the data manager and parse YAML configuration
        # See yaml_version example
        pages:
          - components:
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
            layout:
              type: flex
            title: Flex - basic example
        ```

    === "Result"
        [![FlexBasic]][flexbasic]

### Flex - advanced example

> If you want to customize the default behavior, the [Flex][vizro.models.Flex] model allows you to configure three optional arguments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to customize the default behavior, the [Flex][vizro.models.Flex] model enables you to configure three optional arguments:
```

        # See yaml_version example
        pages:
          - components:
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
            layout:
              type: flex
              direction: row
              gap: 40px
              wrap: true
            title: Flex - advanced example
        ```

    === "Result"
        [![FlexAdvanced]][flexadvanced]

### Change the size of flex-items

There may be times when resizing your flex items is necessary, such as when designing for different screen sizes or combining elements with diverse content types (e.g., charts, text, or images).

> You can achieve this by either specifying the `width` and `height` directly on the components or, if you're comfortable, applying custom CSS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can achieve this by either specifying the `width` and `height` directly on the components or by applying custom CSS.
```

Reviewer: I'm uncomfortable with "comfortable" since it creates indecision in the reader, "Am I comfortable?" because it doesn't really say what the requirements are to be comfortable.

Reviewer: You could also add anchors to the headings below for each option again, so the reader can see there is more guidance coming.

              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                  width: 400
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                  width: 400
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                  width: 400
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                  width: 400
                type: graph
            layout:
              type: flex
              direction: row
              gap: 40px
              wrap: true
            title: Change the width for Graph
        ```

    === "Result"
        [![FlexItemSizeArg]][flexitemsizearg]

#### Change size via custom CSS

> Custom CSS is often a better choice than setting sizes through component arguments when you need to apply a consistent `height` and/or `width` across multiple elements without repeating code. This is especially helpful for ensuring uniform sizing of all flex items.

Reviewer: "Better" is a loaded term if you aren't explaining why it's better. Perhaps "preferred" is a good alternative?

> Each item within the `Flex` layout is wrapped in a `Div` with the `classname="flex-item"`, which can be targeted with CSS. For more information on identifying the correct selectors, refer to our [user guide on custom CSS](custom-css.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each item within the `Flex` layout is wrapped in a `Div` with the `classname="flex-item"`, which can be targeted with CSS. To learn how to identify the correct selectors, refer to our [user guide on custom CSS](custom-css.md).
```

        )

        dashboard = vm.Dashboard(pages=[page])
        Vizro().build(dashboard).run()
        ```

    === "app.yaml"
        ```yaml
        # Still requires a .py to add data to the data manager and parse YAML configuration
        # See yaml_version example
        pages:
          - components:
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
            layout:
              type: flex
              direction: row
              gap: 40px
              wrap: true
            title: Flex - advanced example
        ```

    === "Result"
        [![FlexAdvanced]][flexadvanced]

> ### Change the size of flex-items

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Change the size of flex items
```

> There may be times when resizing your flex items is necessary, such as when designing for different screen sizes or combining elements with diverse content types (e.g., charts, text, or images).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There may be times when resizing your flex items is necessary, such as when designing for different screen sizes or combining elements with diverse content types (e.g. charts, text, or images).
```

            width: 260px;
        }
        ```

    === "app.py"
        ```py
        import vizro.models as vm
        from vizro import Vizro

        page = vm.Page(
            id="page-with-uniform-flex-items",
            title="Change the width via CSS",
            layout=vm.Flex(direction="row", wrap=True),
            components=[
                vm.Card(
                    text="""
                       # Lorem Ipsum

                       Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Aliquam sed elementum ligula.
                       In ultricies est ac mauris vehicula fermentum. Curabitur faucibus elementum lectus.
                       Name ut ipsum tortor. Praesent ut nulla risus. Praesent in dignissim nulla.
                   """
                )
                for i in range(12)
            ],
        )

        dashboard = vm.Dashboard(pages=[page])
        ```

        <img src=https://py.cafe/logo.png alt="PyCafe logo" width="30"><b><a target="_blank" href="https://py.cafe/vizro-official/vizro-custom-card-styling">Run and edit this code in PyCafe</a></b>

    === "Result"
        [![FlexItemSizeCSS]][flexitemsizecss]

> ## Alternative layout approaches

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to add an example that mixes flex and grid (via a container) or is that insane?

Author: No, that makes sense! I don't think we need to add all combinations, but I can add a simple example 👍

## Flex Layout

The [Flex][vizro.models.Flex] layout offers a dynamic and flexible way to organize components within a page. Built on the CSS Flexbox model, it is specifically designed to create responsive layouts that adjust to varying screen sizes and available space.

Unlike the [Grid][vizro.models.Layout] layout, which uses a predefined row-and-column structure, the `Flex` layout provides greater flexibility by enabling components to resize, align, and position themselves dynamically based on the layout configuration.

If you're new to Flexbox, we strongly recommend exploring [An Interactive Guide to Flexbox](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/css/interactive-guide-to-flexbox/).

### Flex - basic example

To switch to a `Flex` layout, simply pass `vm.Flex()` to the `layout` argument of the [Page][vizro.models.Page]. This replaces the default `Grid` layout with a `Flex` layout, where components (flex items) are arranged vertically (`direction="column"`), remain on a single line (`wrap=False`), and have a default spacing (`gap=24px`) between them.

> !!! example "Flex - basic example"

Reviewer 3: I don't find this example super compelling because the end result looks pretty similar to what would happen if you just had the default grid layout. Just from the screenshot it's not really obvious what's different other than it's 3 graphs with a bit cut off.

But I know finding good examples is a lot of work and you already did all the screenshots and everything, so I'd suggest:
* write a note here explaining how the screenshot is different from a grid layout?
* maybe make it into a pycafe example so the user can scroll themselves?

Author: I can add more Graphs in there, so the difference is clearer. I initially only added 3 rather than 5 to keep the yaml example small 😅 

This is already a pyCafe example 😬 Or there is a pyCafe link already embedded

                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
              - figure:
                  _target_: violin
                  x: day
                  y: tip
                  color: day
                  data_frame: tips
                type: graph
            layout:
              type: flex
            title: Flex - basic example
        ```

    === "Result"
        [![FlexBasic]][flexbasic]

### Flex - advanced example

If you want to customize the default behavior, the [Flex][vizro.models.Flex] model enables you to configure three optional arguments:

- `direction`: Defines the layout direction of the components within the flex container, determining whether they are arranged in rows or columns.
- `gap`: Controls the spacing between components in the flex container, enabling you to set consistent horizontal and vertical spacing between items.
- `wrap`: Determines whether components should wrap onto multiple lines or remain on a single line when there isn't enough space in the container.

> !!! example "Flex - advanced example"

Reviewer 3: Same goes for this example: I think it could be clearer what's happening here or just use a note explaining how and why it's different from the above. "With this screen size there's not enough space on one line for all 3 graphs and so it wraps since `wrap=True`, unlike if you used a grid and all 3 would be squeezed into the screen width, or if you set `wrap=False` then it would do xyz etc. etc."

One nice way to do this might be to use `hl_lines` to highlight the only line that's different from the above example.

Author: Yes, I’ve been using `hl_lines` throughout the Vizro user tutorial I added, but since we haven’t used it much in the standard docs, it didn’t cross my mind here. Good point!

### Change the size of flex items

There may be times when resizing your flex items is necessary, such as when designing for different screen sizes or combining elements with diverse content types (e.g. charts, text, or images).

You can achieve this by:

- [either specifying the `width` and `height` directly on the components](#change-size-via-components-arguments)
- [or by applying custom CSS](#change-size-via-custom-css)

#### Change size via component's arguments

The syntax for setting `width` and `height` varies between components. Refer to the component's documentation for the correct syntax and usage, such as:

- `Graph`: See the documentation on [Plotly - Adjust Graph Size in Python](https://plotly.com/python/setting-graph-size/).
- `AgGrid`: See the documentation on [Dash - Change Grid Size](https://dash.plotly.com/dash-ag-grid/grid-size)
- `DataTable`: See the documentation on [Dash - Setting Table Height](https://dash.plotly.com/datatable/height#setting-table-height-with-vertical-scroll)
- `Card`: See our documentation on [Card - The extra argument](https://vizro.readthedocs.io/en/stable/pages/user-guides/card/#the-extra-argument)

> !!! example "Change the width for Graph"

Reviewer 3: Also this example. Maybe highlight the line that's different and emphasise you've set `width=400` and explain the difference that's made. Otherwise it's not really clear how it's different form the above or what it's demonstrating.

!!! example "Change the width of all flex items with CSS"
    === "my_css_file.css"
        ```css
        /* Apply styling to all flex items */
        #page-with-uniform-flex-items .flex-item {
            width: 260px;
        }
        ```

    === "app.py"
        ```py
        import vizro.models as vm
        from vizro import Vizro

        page = vm.Page(
            id="page-with-uniform-flex-items",
            title="Change the width via CSS",
            layout=vm.Flex(direction="row", wrap=True),
            components=[
                vm.Card(
                    text="""
                       # Lorem Ipsum

                       Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Aliquam sed elementum ligula.
                       In ultricies est ac mauris vehicula fermentum. Curabitur faucibus elementum lectus.
                       Name ut ipsum tortor. Praesent ut nulla risus. Praesent in dignissim nulla.
                   """
                )

>                 for i in range(12)

Reviewer 3: @huong-li-nguyen I guess you decided that unsetting the height/width was the best approach then? Since you did #1095.

This makes most sense to me as a solution too 👍

            ],
        )

        dashboard = vm.Dashboard(pages=[page])
        ```

        <img src=https://py.cafe/logo.png alt="PyCafe logo" width="30"><b><a target="_blank" href="https://py.cafe/vizro-official/vizro-custom-card-styling">Run and edit this code in PyCafe</a></b>

    === "Result"
        [![FlexItemSizeCSS]][flexitemsizecss]

### Combine Flex and Grid

You can also combine the `Flex` and `Grid` layout to benefit from both. The `Grid` layout is ideal for defining the overall page structure, while the `Flex` layout enables flexibility within individual sections.

> For example, in the layout below, we use the `Grid` layout to arrange two charts at the top and a container with multiple cards at the bottom. Within this card container, we apply the `Flex` layout so that the cards automatically adjust their positioning based on the available space.

Reviewer 3: This should link to the page on containers somewhere.

                vm.Graph(figure=px.histogram(tips, x="total_bill")),
                vm.Container(
                    title="Flexbox with Cards",
                    layout=vm.Flex(direction="row", wrap=True),
                    components=[
                        vm.Card(
                            text="""
                                    # Lorem Ipsum

                                    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Aliquam sed elementum ligula, in pharetra velit.
                                    In ultricies est ac mauris vehicula fermentum. Curabitur faucibus elementum lectus, vitae luctus libero fermentum.
                                    Name ut ipsum tortor. Praesent ut nulla risus. Praesent in dignissim nulla. In quis blandit ipsum.
                                """,
                            extra={"style": {"width": "240px"}},
                        )
                        for i in range(6)
                    ],
                ),
            ],
        )

        dashboard = vm.Dashboard(pages=[page])
        Vizro().build(dashboard).run()
        ```

    === "Result"
        [![FlexGridCombined]][flexgridcombined]

> ## Alternative layout approaches

Reviewer 3: I think this section needs a slight rewording just to reflect the fact that grid isn't the only possible approach now.
